# vcpkg Flight Rules

Instructions & Guidelines for:
- Building carbon engine components using vcpkg
- Updating this vcpkg Registry

## vcpkg Primer

If you are new to vcpkg, please read this primer
- [vcpkg Primer](pages/vcpkg-primer.md)	

## Building Carbon Components

All of our carbon components require cmake.
On Windows we use MSVC v141, however we are in the process of upgrading to v145.
On macOS we use AppleClang.

### Instructions for building

For detailed information on how our build system works, please see the section on building
- [How we build Carbon Components](pages/building.md)

Clone the repository, and it's submodules
```
> git clone git@github.com:carbonengine/scheduler.git
> cd scheduler
> git submodule update --init
```

Choose a cmake preset available on your system and configure.
```
> cmake --list-presets
Available configure presets:
  "x64-windows-internal"
  "x64-windows-release"
  "x64-windows-debug"
  "x64-windows-trinitydev"

> cmake --preset x64-windows-release
```

Build the component
```
cmake --build .cmake-build-x64-windows-release
```

## Updating vcpkg ports

You've made a change to a component, we'll use scheduler as an example. You've created a PR that got accepted into scheduler's main branch, and tagged a new version, lets say v5.0.0.
Now you want to make that version available to other components through vcpkg.

First, if you haven't done already, fork the [carbonengine/vcpkg-registry](https:github.com/carbonengine/vcpkg-registry) repository.
Then clone that fork of the registry, and make a new branch
```
> git clone git@github.com:<YOUR GITHUB ACCOUNT>/vcpkg-registry
> cd vcpkg-registry
> git checkout -b ugrade_scheduler
```
Then open `ports/carbon-scheduler/portfile.cmake` and change the commit ID:
```
vcpkg_from_git(
  OUT_SOURCE_PATH SOURCE_PATH
  URL git@github.com:carbonengine/scheduler.git
  REF <NEW COMMIT ID> <-- Change this to the new commit ID
  HEAD_REF main
)
...
```
Then open `ports/carbon-scheduler/vcpkg.json` and change the version number:
```
{
  "name": "carbon-scheduler",
  "version": "5.0.0", <-- change this to the new version
  "description": "Provides channels and a scheduler for Greenlet coroutines.",
  "homepage": "https://github.com/carbonengine/scheduler",
  ...
```
	- In this step, also make sure to upgrade any dependency versions that got upgraded in the main scheduler repo's `vcpkg.json` file. When scheduler is built as a vcpkg dependency, the `vcpkg.json` file from the registry will be used to determine dependencies & versions, not the one from the scheduler repo.

Then stage and commit my changes
```
> git add -u
> git commit -m "Upgrade carbon-scheler to 5.0.0"
```
Then run the update tool python script
`python tools/update-ports.py --all`
If everything is successful, you should see an automatically generated commit at the head of my branch:
```
Update version registry
This is an automatically generated version update for the following packages:
Update carbon-scheduler
```
Then push this branch up to your fork and create a pull request to the main branch of [carbonengine/vcpkg-registry](https:github.com/carbonengine/vcpkg-registry) and ask for a review.

When the pull request is merged, the registry will contain the new version of scheduler

## Creating new vcpkg ports

First follow the first steps of the "Updating vcpkg ports":
> - First, if you haven't done already, fork the [carbonengine/vcpkg-registry](https:github.com/carbonengine/vcpkg-registry) repository.
  - You then clone that fork of the registry, and make and checkout a new branch

To create a new port, simply create a new folder inside the `ports/` directory. This folder must contain two files, a `vcpkg.json`, and a `portfile.cmake`. 
A good starting point is to copy a simple existing component like carbon-scheduler or carbon-core.

- [vcpkg.json reference documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/reference/vcpkg-json)
- [portfile variables reference documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/maintainers/variables)
	- [portfile functions reference](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/maintainers/functions/vcpkg_cmake_configure)

Once you're done stage and commit your new files:
```
> git add ports/my-new-port
> git commit -m "Add my new port"
```

Then run the port update script
```
> python tools/update_ports.py --all
```

If everything is successful you should have new autogenerated commit at the head of your branch.
```
Update version registry
This is an automatically generated version update for the following packages:
Add my-new-port
```

Then just as in the "Updating vcpkg ports" section, push your new branch to your fork, and create a pull request into the main branch of the [carbonengine/vcpkg-registry](https:github.com/carbonengine/vcpkg-registry) repository.


## Making local changes to dependencies

Lets say you're working on a change to [Core](https://github.com/carbonengine/core) and you want to build [Scheduler](https://github.com/carbonengine/scheduler) with it locally before creating a pull request.
[Scheduler](https://github.com/carbonengine/scheduler) depends on [Core](https://github.com/carbonengine/core), so a common carbon engine developer work flow is testing dependency changes with dependent projects.

This documentation assumes you know what [Overlay Ports](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/concepts/overlay-ports) are.

To understand this section, please read through the [Overlay Ports](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/concepts/overlay-ports) of the vcpkg documentation.

The rest of the instructions will assume you are changing [Core](https://github.com/carbonengine/core), and testing it with [Scheduler](https://github.com/carbonengine/scheduler) but they apply to any project available through vcpkg.

Create a patch file or files representing the diff between your changes and the latest version of Core in vcpkg.

Copy the port directory `ports/carbon-core` and place it in a temporary location on your machine EG `Desktop/tmp/myoverlayports/carbon-core`. From now on when the instructions refer to editing the carbon-core port, they mean this temporary copy of it.

Drag in to the temporary port (`Desktop/tmp/myoverlayports/carbon-core`) your git patch file, generated with the `git diff` command.

Edit the porfile.cmake in the temporary port, and add a `PATCHES` parameter to the `vcpkg_from_git/gitlab` functions. (this also applies to the `vcpkg_from_github` command. Most other portfile functions for downloading code support similar functionality, for details consult the  [portfile reference documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/maintainers/functions/vcpkg_from_git))

```
vcpkg_from_git(
  OUT_SOURCE_PATH SOURCE_PATH
  URL git@github.com:carbonengine/core.git
  REF 250df5221bdbb981a46669ac7a7e72ed33e099e0
  HEAD_REF main
  PATCHES mypatchfile.patch # <-- add a PATCHES parameter, check the documentation, this supports multiple patch files
)
```

Now we'll assume that you want to build Scheduler against this patched version of core.

In the scheduler project, open up the `vcpkg-configuration.json` file, and add an "overlay-ports" field that is a list containing a path to your overlay ports directory
[vcpkg-configuration.json](https://github.com/carbonengine/scheduler/blob/d1fa83bac1908cab78143642a2253a832e3ccb5d/vcpkg-configuration.json)
```
{
  "default-registry": {
    "kind": "git",
    "baseline": "242ac6932a9cd2607332969129e9572516f28d65",
    "repository": "https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg.git"
  },
  "registries": [
    {
      "kind": "git",
      "repository": "git@github.com:carbonengine/vcpkg-registry.git",
      "baseline": "d431d05377ae8d620c644c49c3f4d1bd974cee18",
      "packages": ["python3", "ccp-debug-info", "carbon-core", "greenlet", "tracy"]
    }
  ],

  "overlay-ports": ["Desktop/tmp/myoverlayports"]
}
```

Now when you build Scheduler, vcpkg will look for any dependencies in the `myoverlayports` directory first. So even though, `carbon-core` is configured to be sourced from the [carbonengine/vcpkg-registry](https:github.com/carbonengine/vcpkg-registry), it will be sourced from your `myoverlayports` directory. 

## Things to consider when adding dependencies from vcpkg

It's important to note that our triplet files build dependencies dynamically by default. If you add a dependency, if you add a dependency and you want it built statically, you will need to add a [port customization](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/vcpkg/users/triplets#per-port-customization) for it in our triplet files, EG:
```
if (PORT MATCHES "freetype")
    set(VCPKG_LIBRARY_LINKAGE static)
endif ()
```
